.\" Copyright (c) 2014-2017 Yon <anaseto@bardinflor.perso.aquilenet.fr>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.Dd May 7, 2021
.Dt FRUNDIS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm frundis
.Nd exporting tool for the frundis markup language
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Fl T Ar format
.Op Fl a
.Op Fl s
.Op Fl t
.Op Fl x
.Op Fl z
.Op Fl o Ar output-file
.Op Ar path
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
program reads an UTF-8 encoded file given by
.Ar path ,
or standard input if no file is given as argument, written in the
.Nm frundis
language as documented in
.Xr frundis_syntax 5 ,
and exports it to LaTeX, XHTML, EPUB, markdown or groff mom.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl T Ar format
Specify the format in which to export.
The
.Ar format
argument can be
.Cm latex ,
.Cm xhtml ,
.Cm epub ,
.Cm markdown
or
.Cm mom .
.It Fl a
When exporting to XHTML, output only one file, instead of a directory with one
file per part or chapter, and implies also that
.Fl s
is no longer the default.
.It Fl o Ar output-file
Specify the name of an output file, instead of printing to stdout.
In the case
of exporting to EPUB, and XHTML unless
.Fl a
is specified, this option is mandatory and specifies the name of a new
directory that will contain all the necessary files.
For EPUB, zipping has to be done manually after, or by using the
.Fl z option .
.It Fl s
Specify that a standalone document should be produced.
This is the default for
XHTML and EPUB output formats.
.It Fl t
Use template-like restricted mode (experimental).
.It Fl x
Allow #run macro and external filters.
Use this option only for trusted sources.
.It Fl z
When exporting to EPUB, produce a finalized compressed EPUB file with the name
suffix
.Sq .epub .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Nm
uses the following environment variables:
.Bl -tag -width 13n
.It Ev FRUNDISLIB
This variable can be used to specify a colon separated list of directories in
which to search for
.Nm
included source files.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Pa examples/
This directory available in the root of the distribution contains examples for
easy customization of output.
.It Pa examples/stylesheet.css
Example stylesheet for easy customization of XHTML and EPUB output formats.
.It Pa examples/preamble.tex
Example of preamble for LaTeX for easy customization.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
To print simple XHTML without headers:
.Pp
.Dl "$ frundis -a -T xhtml input.frundis > output.html"
.Pp
To print a standalone XHTML:
.Pp
.Dl "$ frundis -a -s -T xhtml input.frundis > output.html"
.Pp
To create a directory with XHTML files and an index:
.Pp
.Dl "$ frundis -T xhtml -o output-dir input.frundis"
.Pp
The following command will create an EPUB, both the uncompressed directory with
the contents, named
.Sq output ,
and the compressed, ready-to-use EPUB file
.Sq output.epub :
.Pp
.Dl "$ frundis -T epub -o output -z input.frundis"
.Pp
If the
.Fl z
option is ommited, compression can be done manually.
Assuming the zip program from
.Lk http://infozip.sourceforge.net/
is installed:
.Pp
.Dl "$ frundis -T epub -o output-dir input.frundis"
.Dl "$ cd output-dir"
.Dl "$ zip -X0 ../my-epub.epub mimetype"
.Dl "$ zip -Xur9D ../my-epub.epub *"
.Pp
To produce a LaTeX document without a preamble:
.Pp
.Dl "$ frundis -T latex input.frundis > output.tex"
.Pp
To produce a complete LaTeX document:
.Pp
.Dl "$ frundis -s -T latex input.frundis > output.tex"
.Pp
To produce a pdf document using groff mom output format:
.Pp
.Dl "$ frundis -s -T mom input.frundis > output.mom"
.Dl "$ pdfmom -k -t output.mom > output.pdf"
.Pp
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Standard error messages have the following form:
.Pp
.D1 Nm Ns : Ar file Ns : Ns Ar lnum Ns : Ns Ar macro Ns : Ar message
.Pp
The
.Ar file
field specifies the name of the source file in which an error was encountered.
It can be
.Cm stdin
when reading from standard input.
The
.Ar lnum
field specifies the number of the line in the source file where the error has
been detected.
The
.Ar macro
field is the name of the macro being called (if any).
One or more
.Ar message
fields provide further details on the nature of the error.
.Pp
The
.Ar file ,
.Ar lnum
and
.Ar macro
fields appear only when it makes sense.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr frundis_syntax 5
